# No Five Skandhas, No Object, Until We Come to No Realm

We lack of understanding of the Dharma of Emptiness and keep yielding to the play of delusion as permanence and as independent existence. Ultimate Emptiness is not the obstinate void of our worldly emptiness concept; Furthermore, it is neither the analysis of the voidness as practiced by the Theravadins nor the voidness of the present moment as perceived by Bodhisattvas.

However, the supramundane Emptiness of True Existence is not possessed by Buddhas alone. All of us are endowed with the same truth and would come to know it if only we relinquished the discriminating mind, thus realizing the supramundane Void of True Existence. In order to have correct practice, it is not necessary to apply the method of Theravada, the Middle Vehicle, or Mahayana. Anyone can become Buddha spontaneously by deeply comprehending that "All existence is void."

The Sage of Theravada and a worldly person of us has the same potential to touch the great Tao. Thus, we can seek to sharpen our wisdom and receive the radiant Dharma at any time. The six senses and the corresponding types of data, together, generate the six kinds of consciousness:

- The consciousness behind the mind
- The consciousness behind the hearing
- The consciousness behind the seeing
- The consciousness behind the smelling
- The consciousness behind the tasting
- The consciousness behind the touching

These groups are referred to as the eighteen realms or the eighteen mundane dharmas. To be conscious means to be aware of the experiences. Thus, we are always bound with the eighteen realms. Hence, the cognitive objects are discerned and produced by sense-data, and from the six kinds of consciousness arise all the other functions. How do the six kinds of consciousness receive the six sense-data and act upon receiving them?

The mundane dharmas of the eighteen realms with their ranges are clear; Each of them has a character of its own. And, as a matter of fact, just as hundred rivers eventually merge into one ocean, all dharmas are contained in one teaching - the teaching of Emptiness. To attain Enlightenment instantly, all one needs is to understand comprehensively the dharma of Emptiness as the essence of the experiences.

Looking at the city at night, we see the brilliant lights of ten-thousand households: Such is the form of light. During a blackout, we are able to observe the form of darkness. Light and darkness both have birth and death, yet the nature of seeing is free of cyclic experiences. We are in the nature of seeing to perceive darkness or light in the absence of the other. This may help us to understand the timeless nature of being.

Suffering comes from our attachments to pleasantness and it is difficult to relinquish. Most of us cannot grasp the understanding of the subject of the experiences. The one who can enlighten oneself about the subject of experiences can understand one's own mind and immediatly see his or her own nature. This always holds true for the nature of the six kinds of experiences generated by six senses and six kinds of data.

_The Surangama Sutra_ says, "When the nature of one sense is purified from its own data, all of the six senses are equally liberated." Thus, our study and practice should begin by looking inward in order to free ouselves from the effects of duality. It is truly important to focus on our attention to the nature of experiences. When it is accomplished, it means a true awakening to the supreme Tao.

The Gautama Buddha is said to have attained the supreme Tao already; Nevertheless, he appeared in the world in order to salvage all sentient beings by manifesting himself as a worldly prince, the son of King Suddhodana of the Sakya clan. He renounced his regal status at the age of twenty-nine so he could dedicate himself whole-heartedly to the quest of liberation.

At the age of thirty-five, the former prince attained perfect and complete Enlightenment while meditating beneath a Bodhi tree. Noticing a bright star in the eastern sky, he observed that the nature of seeing is boundless. He commented that all sentient beings have the same wisdom and virtue as a Tathagata, but all those goodness are covered by delusions and attachments.

All evidence proves that Sakyamuni attained the Original Nature, but most of us are confused regarding to our individual's ability to comprehend his teachings. Most of us are still in the stage of mistaking the four elements as the body and the six conditioned sense-data for the mind. The former creates delusion and the foundation for the latter to create hindrances to the supreme Tao.

For example, the object of seeing is the most confusing, and we can easily fall into self-deception by believing in the independent existence of whatever we are looking at. The process of experience gets so twisted that it suits volition to grasp and to possess the objects, thus changing the process of experience into a source of suffering. However, the Buddha's teaching is the path to liberate from suffering; and whoever understands this, understands all the Mahayana sutras as well.

Let us return once more to the example of the mirror and the reflection. The mirror was made to reflect whatever it faces, including mountains, rivers, and even the greath earth. However, the problem arises when the reflection is mistaken for the object, and when there is no realization that it may vanish at any time, as the reflection itself is a part of the Birth-and-Death cycle, too. And the timeless characteristic of the mirror that we are talking about - the independent ability to reflect - is the True Self; and yet it its very seldomly realized.

The was a master called Ch'an who said, "Always facing it, yet not knowing what it is!" This means that we wordly don't recognize the nature of seeing for what it is. Ignoring the clarity of the mirror, we hold on to the reflection. Those who inhabit in heavens still worry about death although their lives last much longer. The nature of seeing, however, is not amenable to birth or death, nor is it dependent on the sense and its data; After the images, shapes, or actions vanish, the nature of seeing remains, unmovable and unchange-able. And the same holds true for the nature of other kinds of experiences.

Simply stated, we should not hold on the belief that the reflections are permanent and cling to them. The remaining five doors of experiences can be inferred from the example of the seeing; And to go further, the mirror which reflects is also a reflection of itself, by itself. As the sutra says, "There is no senses and their realms, until we come to no realm of consciosness."

In the True Void of Supramundane Existence, where there are no more five Skandhas, there is nothing to be attained. Thus, the eighteen realms are void at this very moment. Without the mirror, how can there be any reflection?

[No Ignorance and No End of It, Until We Come to No Old Age and Death](./13-no-ignorance-and-no-end-of-it-until-we-come-to-no-old-age-and-death)

