# Translator's Introduction

Wonderful Prajna! Mother of all Buddhas and the supreme guide and teacher of sages and saints! All that is comes from Prajna and will returns to Prajna.

Sentient beings experience birth and death on the Wheel of Life-and-Death, their minds deeply affected by ignorance, bent by the five skandhas, and confused and submerged in the ocean of suffering for long kalpas. How regrettable!

Prajna is said to be the light in the darkness of a very long night. On the ebb and flow of the ocean of suffering, Prajna is a raft. To a house consumed by a blazing fire, Prajna is the rain to help saving it. Without Prajna, the universe is darkness. Without Prajna, the human mind is ignorant. Without Prajna, sentient beings suffer without respite.

Cultivation of the Prajna Paramita, the perfected virtue of knowing truth by intuitive insight, relieves us from our suffering and helps us to overcome all kinds of calamities. All Buddhas of the past, present, and future, attained Prajna. And the sages and saints have cultivated Prajna. Therefore, all of us need to cultivate the practice of Prajna.

The wonderful doctrine of Prajna is true and, therefore, real; It is perfect in all places and at all times. And yet, it is inconceivable.

If one can understand that voidness is not void since radiant existence exists within its mystery, then, at that moment, all is perceived as void. Sages and saints become accomplished by means of Prajna, the ultimate ground all sentient beings share. The uniformed majority fails to understand that: All that exists is produced by causes and conditios, and that the self is a false self without any selfhood.

Most grasp form and mistake it for True Existence, enduring immeasurable suffering on the Wheel of Life-and-Death. The practice of truth, or the reality of Prajna, excepted, there is no release from suffering in the Three Realms, no hope of freedom from worldly worries. As it is said in __The Mahaprajna Paramita Sutra__, "All forms are unreal and illusory, and if they are seen as such, the Tathagata will be perceived."

And the Sutra says further, "The one who sees me by form and seeks me by sound cannot perceive the Tathagata because of deluded views." This is to be understood as saying that: The one who perceives the form ( or body ) and the sound ( or voice ) as the Buddha is grasping merely the form, missing the true meaning of the reality that he or she is unable to perceive.

Further more, it says, "A Bodhisattva that still clings to the false notion of an ego, a personality, a being and a life, is not a Bodhisattva." Bodhisattvas, like the Buddhas, establish themselves in Emptiness, apprehending their ego, personality, being, and life as false views rooted in duality.

And then, it is said, "The one who hears this pure teaching with a clear and faithful mind can attain the reality that is formless; those freed from all forms are called Buddhas."

__The Prajna Paramita Hrdaya Sutra__ is the core of __The Mahaprajna Paramita Sutra__ in six hundred scrolls. Its teaching is the teaching of supramundane Voidness as the only true existence, the true Void being mysteriously concealed in the existing.

Therefore, one might say the substance of this sutra is the Voidness of all dharmas; and non-obtaining is the purpose. There is nothing to be obtained from the manifestation of dharmas, all dharmas being void, or empty.

Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, coursing deeply in the Prajna Paramita, comprehended the substance of the reality of Prajna: All dharmas, as well as all five skandhas are empty of self, and completely free of thought. For this, the Bodhisattva received the title as __Guan Zi Zai Pu Sa__.

As the substance of all dharmas, Voidness confirms the true reality of form as non-form. The one who understands that Buddha and sentient beings are not different can liberate all sentient beings from disease and calamity, end the cycle of Birth-and-Death, and attain perfect Enlightenment.

The aggregate of form ( rupa skandha ) stands for all matter that is produced by causes and conditions, with no permanent substance and no separate, lasting self. The remaining four skandhas are as follows: feeling, conception, volition, and consciousness.

They all belong to the dharma of mind, which is, likewise, void. But mind cannot find expression without form, and form cannot manifest itself without mind. Without form, mind cannot be expressed; and without mind, form cannot be manifested. Or, in other words, apart from form there is no mind, and apart from mind there is no form. Although they are not the same, they are inseparable.

As stated in the Sutra: "Form is Voidness, and Voidness is Form." Being neither form nor mind, all dharmas are void here and now; this is the wonderful Dharma of Reality and Suchness, transcending all others.

The uniformed view the perceptible world with all its beings and non-beings as real or true. Some of them know that it is an illusion produced by the interaction of matter and mentality, that it is deceptive and impermanent, and that it must return to the Void.

This interpretation of voidness has not been especially created by Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in order to emphasize that all dharmas are rooted in emptiness. Instead, because all existence is originally devoid of selfhood and, therefore, empty. It is what Mahasattvas truly have been practicing for countless kalpas.

All those who attained Enlightenment, also attained the understanding of true reality. They perceive that the five skandhas are empty and, thereby, overcome all ills and suffering.

Ultimately, mind and form are not the same thing but they are not different. Likewise, the rest of the existing world has neither birth nor death, is neither pure nor impure, and it neither increases nor decreases, because it is originally void of selfhood.

If one perceives birth as coming and death as going, or if one claims that clean is pure and less a decrease, then one is not yet empty of the five skandhas. These views represent obstacles which bind oneself. And if one is not able to liberate oneself, how can one hope to liberate others?

When one has finally reached the understanding that all existence is produced by causes and conditions, then all reality equals stillness and the absence of diversified form. Then birth and death, pure and impure, increase and decrease - all are void.

The entire range of artificial or contrived forms is the result of the six senses, six kinds of data, and six kinds of consciousness. Reality, in truth, does not comprise any realm. When the five skandhas are empty, there is no diversity of form. Without ignorance, there is no ending of ignorance. And it is true for old age and death, too.

Supreme Prajna is stillness without form. When one is neither the resultant person nor the dependent condition, one's suffering ends. When delusory thoughts and views are severed, it is the end of the cause of suffering.

However, to relinquish the doctrine of unreality is to block the cessation of suffering. Without the three studies, there is no path. If there is no subject of wisdom, it is called __Non-wisdom__. Without the object and its domain, there is absolutely nothing to obtain.

The true mind is not empty, yet it is the Emptiness underlying all thoughts. Although Bodhi is considered to be an attainment, there is actually nothing to attain. To perceive the ground of all Buddhas is suchness.

There should be no seeking - no inside and no outside. The universe is not attainable in that way. As long as there is something to attain, there are obstacles; thought arises and there is, then, an object. To have an object means duality, which means the loss of true reality, which _cannot_ be called Prajna Paramita.

There are adornments everywhere, and ten-thousand merits manifest themselves. When Dharmakaya manifests, there is only true Emptiness. Mind established in true Emptiness completely encompasses the universe. 

Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara practiced wonderful Wisdom adn attained Enlightenment completely free of attachment. He entered emptiness, ubobstructed, through the gate of liberation. Since there is nothing but only Enptiness, the Bodhisattva is never moved by eulogy or ridicule, slander, or fame.

Letting go of all that seemingly exists on its own, independently of the mind, sets forth brightness; and the one experienceing it will not be intimidated. The Bodhisattva the kind of liberation called Nirvana.

Similarly, the one who has been practicing over a long period of time achieves wonderful calmness, which empowers him or her when faced with disturbance. Water cannot submerge such a one, nor can fire burn. Having attained liberation, the Bodhisattva is fearless.

Seeking Dharma _outside_, in what exists seemly independently of the mind, is proceeding backward, perpetuating a misunderstanding of duality, dreaming of gain, and holding the cycle of birth and death to be the opposite of Nirvana.

It is essential to let go of any distinction such as deaming versus thinking, if one wants to enter the gate of liberation through non-action. Only when the name or form is dispatched and there is no mind object, can the original Enlightenment manifest and Nirvana be obtained.

All Buddhas in the three periods depend on the Prajna Paramita for the attainment of Anuttara-Samyak-Sambodhi. Due to their superb causes, they attain the fruit of sainthood. Thus, we know that the Prajna Paramita can disovle all kinds of dellusions.

Independent of personality and Dharma, free at all times and in all places, the Buddhas manifest or remain concealed depending on their potential. _The Great Mantra_ is beyond the comprehension of the saints and the worldly alike. Endowed with a power to dispel ignorance, it radiates brilliance and stillness.

This _Great Mantra_ emanates unadulterated Wisdom, and its power to transcend the Three Realms and attain supreme Nirvana is beyond comparison. Illuminating throughout the twelve quarters of space, it shines, like the sun, everywhere without discrimitation. Such is the unequaled _Mantra_.

The one who can receive and hold this Sutra and Mantra, will liberate all sentient beings from obstacles, release them from suffering and attain Complete Enlightenment. This is true and it is real! Therefore, the Prajna Paramita Mantra says, "Gate, gate, paragete, parasamgate, Bodhi Svaha."

The great master T'an Hsu commented, "The _Mantra_ belongs to the five kinds of texts deemed primal, untranslatable, and inconceivable; when they are translated and explained, they will become conceivable Dharma, and their original meaning and merit will be lost."

In short, the primary purpose of the Prajna Paramita Mantra is to liberate oneself and others, traverse the sea of suffering and, attaing Complete Enlightenment, reach the serenity and joy that is Nirvana.

Dharma Master Lok To  
Young Men's Buddhist Association of America  
November, 200 ( Buddhist Year : 2544 )  
Bronx, New York

Next: [Prologue by Grand Master T'an Hsu](./03-prologue-by-grand-master-tan-hsu)


