# Prajna Paramita Hrdaya Sutra

Tranlsated by Tripitaka Master Hsuan Tsang of the T'ang Dynasty with Commentary by Grand Master T'an Hsu.

Of the seven known translations of the __Heart Sutra__, the one by the Tripitaka Master Hsuan Tsang ( 600-664 C.E. ) is the most popular. _Tripitaka_ is a Sanskrit term designating the whole Buddhist canon, which consists of three sections:

1. The _Sutras_, which are the original texts of the Buddhadharma.
2. The _Vinaya_, or rules of discipline.
3. And, the _Sastras_, or commentaries, related to theory and practice, as well as to teachings.

Dharma Master Hsuan Tsang understood the Tripitaka thoroughly, and, therefore, the title of Tripitaka Master was bestowed upon him. He did not study canonical texts primarily for personal satisfaction. His purpose was to make them available to others, and he acted in compliance with a direct order from the emperor.

Dharma Master Hsuan Tsang was a very famous sage in the T'ang Dynasty. The description of the arduous way by which he obtained the scriptures is known to every family and household, and there is no need to delve into it at this time.

The Prajna literature is very extensive; it covers approximately twenty years of the Buddha's teaching career. The seven translations of the Sutra display minor differences, but the essential meaning was respected in each case. There is no major difference among them. According to Tripitaka Master Kumarajiva's translation, this Sutra was spoken by the Buddha.

Every translation of the _Heart Sutra_ includes a commentary which consist of three parts:

1. The reason for the Sutra
2. The method used to convey the meaning
3. The Sutra's history

The _Hrdaya Sutra_ was composed of excerpts from the _Mahaprajna Paramita_ texts, and simple words were carefully employed to convey profound meanings. Although the Chinese version contains only two hundred sixty single characters, it nevertheless, embodies the entire Prajna literature in all its depth and subtlety.

As to the reason for this Sutra, we only need to look at the method used to put the text together to realize that the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara was chosen as a model for the rest of use and that the Sutra was spoken by the Buddha. To understand it thoroughly is to understand all of the Prajna literature. We are not going to address the Sutra's history at this time.

Next: [When The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara](./05-when-the-bodhisattva-avalokitesvara)


