# When The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara

The opening words introduce the one practicing Dharma. The Prajna teachings were spoken by the Buddha during the fourth stage, his purpose being to guide those practicing what later became the approach of Theravadins toward the practice of Mahayana Dharma.

Whoever practices virtuous conduct and Dharma primarily to benefit oneself. The Mahayana practice, on the other hand, is aimed to benefit both oneself and others. To liberate all sentient beings implies concern for the well-being of all people.

Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara was chosen to demonstrate to the persons of the Lesser Vehicle mentality the full dimension of the Mahayana doctrines. The name _Avalokitesvara_ lends itself to several interpretations. The Chinese translation - i.e., Guan Zi Zai, - means the attainment of Bodhisattva stage and the causal-ground for practicing Dharma.

Why did the Chinese choose to call the Bodhisattva _Guan Zi Zai_? Because he attained the fruition of the path. Visualizing and contemplating the name, we come to understand its meaning. _Guan_ means to observe and to illuminate. The one who practices the Bodhisattva path not only illuminates his or her own mind but the world as well; And practicing in this manner, one can be sure of obtaining liberation. That is what _Guan Zi Zai_ means.

What is the meaning of _Zi Zai_? The one who is able to halt the two kinds of birth and death and the five fundamental conditions of the passions and delusions can be call _Zi Zai_. To observe one's own self is to discover body and mind bound by the five skandhas and the six senses with their correspondingg six kinds of data; We are not free, and therefore, not _Zi Zai_.

The name _Avalokitesvara_ comes from the ground causes of the Bodhisattva's Dharma practice while on an island, perceiving the sounds of the world, rooted in time as they are, rising and falling with the ebb and flow of the ocean. From the sound of the tide rising and falling, the Bodhisattva attained Enlightenment, perfectly and completely comprehending the Dharma of birth and non-birth.

Someone asked how and why the Bodhisattva attained the Tao and became enlightened by observing the ebb tide? The Bodhisattva, while practicing by the sea, contemplated the sound as it increased, decreased, and then came to a full stop, occuring simultaneously with the ebb tide. He pondered the root of all causes and finally attained Enlightenment by understanding that all existence is subject to birth and death, and therefore, is impermanent. However, the listening itself is timeless; hence it is beyond birth and death.

Those without practice can hear sounds, but they do not listen. While hearing the sounds, they only think of the outside; however, thought the sound of tide has birth and death, the nature of listening does not. Because even when the sound of tide stops, our capacity for, or nature of, listening does not.

We can still hear the wind in the branches of a tree, the songs of birds and the shrill sound of the cicadas. Had our capacity for hearing vanished with the sound, we should not be able to hear ever again. Even when all is quiet late at night, we are aware of silence, or non-sound, because of our capacity for listening.

Hence, hearing and listening are two different kinds of nature which functions differently: Hearing comes and goes in response to stimulation; While listening functions independently of the stimulation of what comes and goes. Thus, we can say that although sounds have birth and death, but the listening capability does not; And it actually never vanishes.

All existence, including dharmas, is impermanent; and therefore, subject to birth and death - just like magic, like buddles or like shadows. The nature of hearing, on the other hand, can never be destroyed.

In this manner, we come to know the bright and accomplished nature of hearing. Our mind accords with whatever we observe: If we observe birth and death, there is birth and death; and if we observe non-birth and non-death, there is no birth and no death. All things are produced by the mind; they are completed through contemplation.

Everyone has a mind and, consequently, a potential to formulate the world according to his or her own intentions, but without effort, one will not succeed. Nature is the substance; mind is the function. The function never separates from substance, nor the substance from the function. Function and substance, though separate, are causally connected.

Nature governs the mind, and the mind is nature's function; they mesh. Although both retain their own character, they are inseparable. Dharma practice can start right at this point. One needs only to understand one's mind, see one's True Nature, and following that, attain the Tao.

The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara practice makes one listen to and be mindful of one's own nature and, by means of listening, attain the wonderful function. Listening to one's own nature has no boundaries, and it can accomodate all sentient beings while saving them.

We worldly react to or become concerned about what we construe to be external, or ourside, sound. Negligent of our True Nature, we hardly ever try to listen to it, and our hearing is partial as a result of it. However, when we listen to our own nature, our listening is not delimited by time. Perceiving one's true thus, one's listening is complete and continual; and one's joy and happiness are permanent.

When phonetically transliterated into Chinese, the Sanskrit word _Bodhisattva_ produces two characters: _Pu Sa_ or _Bo Sa_. Bodhi (_Pu_ or _Bo_ in Chinese) means the perfect knowledge or wisdom by which a person becomes a Buddha. _Sattva_ (_Sa To_ in Chinese) stands for an enlightened and enlightening being, which is to say that a person has already enlightened his or her own nature by freeing himself or herself from birth and death and helps other sentient beings to do likewise.

However, we woldly hold on to feelings and disregard or oppose the Doctrine. Confusion and frustration take them through the samsaric suffering of the cyche of existence. To perceive one's Self-Nature by listening is the Bodhisattva's way out of the round of Birth-and-Death.

The first line of the Sutra, then, informs us that Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara is the appointed practice leader of the Prajna Assembly. He is going to teach us how to follow his Dharma practice and establish the mindfulness of listening to our Self Nature.

Next: [Was Coursing in The Deep Prajna Paramita](./06-was-coursing-in-the-deep-prajna-paramita)

