# Was Coursing in The Deep Prajna Paramita

This line specifies the Dharma of the Bodhisattva practice. _Coursing_ and _deep_ relate to its quality. At one time, one thousand two hundred fifty-five bhiksus attained the stage of Arhat; they practiced the Dharma of the Lesser Vehicle, which leads to the end of their Birth-and-Death allotment.

It means that every sentient being's body is merely a portion, or a part; whether short, long, or of middle length, the life of a sentient being must end. One round of Birth-and-Death is referred to as an allotment. Whoever practices the Dharma of the Lesser Vehicle will have the conversion into birth and death even after he or she has come to the end of the individual allotment of Birth-and-Death.

What is the conversion into Birth-and-Death? Our distorted thought is at the root of our failure to escape from the cycle of Birth-and-Death. One of the recognized features of thought is to vibrate, quiver and to move one; and the pattern and its movement normally neither change nor become suspended as long as there is consciousness. Every thought has its beginning, its duration and its end.

Due to feeling, conception, volition and consciousness, every thought has its conversion into Birth-and-Death. The activity is never suspended, and thus, the conversion into Birth-and-Death takes place, generated by feeling, conception, volition, and consciousness. Every rise and fall of delusive thought marks this conversion into Birth-and-Death; and that would hinder us from discerning the Buddha's point of view.

To practice Dharma correctly, one should endeavor to liberate one's thought from delusion; the attainment and practice of truth are the means to the attainment of Prajna. Without these, how can we say we are coursing in the deep Prajna Paramita?

To end the samsaric cycle but not the convention of thoughts into Birth-and-Death is a wisdom that is shallow. The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara attained Truth, thereby bringing the two kinds of Birth-and-Death to a complete halt. This then, is the real Prajna, the awe-inspiring Wisdom: It is and has to be beyond discriminating knowledge, since discrimination is one of the manifestations of duality, or Birth-and-Death.

_Paramita_ is a Sanskrit term meaning _virtue perfected to the level of transcendence_. In the context of Buddhist practice, it means to traverse the sea of Samsara, or the sea of Birth-and-Death, and reach Nirvana.

The words "was coursing in the deep Prajna Paramita" attest to the Bodhisattva practice of all three kinds of wisdom - i.e., listening, thinking, and practice; thus, he attained the Radiant Wisdom, or the Ultimate. This clause, then, offers a description of correct Dharma practice, and its purpose is to provide guidance for the Assembly, including those who have attained partial understanding and insight.

Next: [07-he-perceived-that-all-five-skandas-are-empty](He Perceived That All Five Skandas Are Empty)

