# He Perceived That All Five Skandas Are Empty

During his practice of contemplation and illumination, the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara attained the truth. By means of his minutely subtle Dharma practice, he penetrated the five skandhas, perceiving them as empty. The five skandhas - namely, form, feeling, conception, volition, and consciousness - continually provide five occasions for craving and clinging.

There are two types of craving and clinging: to form and to mind. Clinging to form is the domain of the form skandha. The remaining four skandhas constitue the domain of the mind, and the clinging to mind is generated in those four realms. All our grasping, manifested in our attachments and aversions, is generated and developed due to the activity of tese four skandhas.

Craving and clinging emerge at birth, and the Buddhadarma aims to sever them. The initial clinging is ego bound. Ego is the anchor of our volition to grasp and to possess, the root of our attachments and aversions, and via these, the very root of our suffering. Clinging to the body as the true self begins to manifest in early childhood.

The six senses produce the six types of data, six kinds of consciousness and the four mind skandhas along with them; jointly these constitute the delusory ego. Craving and clinging are spontaneous at birth; For, at that time, the ego arises simultaneously with the form skandha.

The rest of our existence is built up by our countless ego-affirming acts which involve all the skandhas, but most prominently the skandha of feeling. Its domain contains pleasant, unpleasant, neutral, or indifferent types of feelings. The body depends on the mind to be provided with pleasant occasions and to be protected from discomfort.

There must be thinking - i.e., conception - followed by action, and action means volition. They, in turn, require established bases of knowledge, and that is the role of the consciousness skandha. 

Children are sent to school to learn and to acquire knowledge that prepares them for the future. When there is sufficient knowledge, there is action, which is invariably preceded by some kind of thinking such as planning, imagining, remembering, etc. The body then receives the support it needs; thereupon, ego-grasping begins, and confusion is generated by the five skandhas as the ego-notion imposes itself on the process of experience.

Once it has become clear beyond any doubt that this present body is not really the self - that one can merely say _mine_ or _my body_ - all delusion regarding the five skandhas is then broken off, and ignorance along with it. What a pity that worldlings get so deeply confused and completely fail to understand this brilliant doctrine!

Grasping the skandhas and the ego-notion, they twist the data to fit their own picture of how reality should be. However, the body is actually not the self. Rather, it is like a house that I might call mine all right, but to consider it to be myself would be a ridiculous error. In the same way, I can't correctly say, "This body is myself." - but I can accuratly say, "This body is mine."

Then, what is the True Self? Our Original Nature is our True Self. It depends on the body only temporarily, and the body is no different from a house. A house is completed and then gradually deteriorates. Similarly, the body has birth and death and the period between them. Our True Nature, on the other hand, has neither birth nor death. It is enduring and unchanging.

The teaching of True Self and of illusory ego is basic to all Buddhadharma. When it is understood, clinging is easily broken off. The teaching related to the five skandhas is referred to as the Dharma of Assemblage. _Skandha_ is a Sanskrit term used by the Buddha in reference to the five components of the so-called human entity.

A skandha is a constituent of personality; and it also means accumulation in the sense that we constantly accumulate good and bad in our minds. The Dharma of the Five Skandhas is comparable to five kinds of material, or elements. The mountains, the rivers, and the entire universe, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in the three periods, even the six realms of existence and the Four Mystical Superiors - all are produced solely by the five skandhas.

Who are the Four Mystical Superiors? They are as follows:

1. The Arhat of Theravada,
2. The Pratyekabuddha of Middle Veicle,
3. The Bodhisattva of Mahayana,
4. And, the Buddha.

What are the six realms of existence?

1. Devas,
2. Human Beings,
3. Asuras,
4. Animals,
5. Hungry Ghosts,
6. And, Hell Beings.

It does not make any difference - mundane or supramundane - they are all produced and completed by the five skandhas. However, by taking the right path (The Ultimate Path), one may become an Arhat, a Pratyekabuddha, a Bodhisattva, or a Buddha.

The skandhas combined constitue the basis of all dharmas, of all sentient beings in the twelves quaters of space, and of all world systems in all universes. Furthermore, the skandhas are the substance of the incandescent True Existence; And, at the same time, the transcendental Void, or Emptiness.

Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, relying on his luminous wisdom, "perceived that all five skandhas are empty." In other words, the Bodhisattva deeply practiced the Prajna Paramita - i.e., the root of Ultimate Reality - and attained the supreme Tao. From then on, all dharmas are understood as being identical with one's True Nature. When that level is attained, the mind comprehends the universe as the Self and the Self as the universe. The grand view is boundless!

The mundane path of Theravada does not accomodate the radiant Truth at its fullest, although in some cases a Mahayana teaching may be perceived as Theravadin by a practitioner of the Lesser Vehicle. The mundane path is grounded in the minute analysis of form dharma (rupa) and mind dharma (nama) and how their interaction contributes to the illusion of a separate ego.

The term _dharma_ may be interpreted as meaning things, methods, formulas or standards; form is distinguished through shape and color, mind through its function of knowing. Our body is composed of four elements - i.e., earth, water, fire, and air - which respectively have the character of solidity, vicosity, temperature, and vibration.

The body is merely a mass of matter that does not possess the faculty of knowing an object; also, matter changes under physical conditions, and because of this feature it is called form. The body also manifests the three characteristics of existence - i.e., impermanence, unsatisfactory conditions, and the absence of selfhood.

Illness and death are caused by an imbalance of the elements or their scarcity or absence according to the Theravada teaching. Birth and Death are the natural results of the body's being compounded from these four elements.

And the mind itself is the knowing without form. The knowing consciousness is the true self, and the body is just a gadget. For example, let us consider someone who someone who though interested in attending this lecture, initially did not want to make the effort because of eeling tired. Then the following thought arose: "Hearing the commentary on that sutra will increase my wisdom and reduce my defilement; I must go and listen to the Dharma." Having persuaded oneself, he or she got on the bus and came here to hear this Dharma. Where did the initiative originate? Clearly, it originated in the mind. Again, the mind is the true self, and the body is the following factor.

Unfortunately, a person of mundane concerns is very confused, mistaking the following factor for the true self, and consequently, there is birth and death. To perceive the brilliant Dharma is to enlighten the mind to itself, and originally the mind has neither birth nor death. Although the body dies and vanishes, the mind is imperishable and indestructible: Understanding this experientially marks the end of the cyclic pattern of existence, the exit from the ocean of suffering.

The mind includes knowing, hearing, seeing, smelling, tasting, and touching. And knowing are the nature of the mind. The Buddha spoke Dharma on numberless occasions for forty-nine years. All of his teachings were expedient means, and all his explainations and discourses were delivered for the purpose of helping sentient beings to be freed from attachment and delusion and to return to the Truth. He dealt predominantly with two dharmas: form and mind.

Since the mind is neither form nor name, in the context of Buddhadharma it is expediently termed _Emptiness_, or _Voidness_ (_Sunyata_ in Sanskrit).

On a particular day, represented for us by the eighth of December, while he was absorbed in deep samadhi, Sakyamuni attained complete Enlightenment. Noticing the birght morning star in the eastern sky, he observed that the nature of seeing can be a kind of connecting. He realized that his own nature of seeing was boundless, and his first statement following his enlightenment was as follows:

"All sentient beings have the same wisdom and virtue as the Tathagata; but because of the obstacles of illusion and grasping, they cannot attain."

Sakyamuni, glimpsing a star in the endless reaches of the eastern sky, realized the infinite nature of Mind and achieved Enlightenment instantaneously; And the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara practiced the three kinds of wisdom of the instructured ones, meditated on sound and attained the stage of Bodhi. When all conditions are generated by one's own mind, that is the Original Mind.

The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara attained Enlightenment by perceiving his Original Nature; that is, he abandoned the duality inherent in subject and object, whereupon he attained the Middle Way perfectly and completely. Such is the pure, radiant Dharmakaya, which is quite different from the accomplishments in the tradition of the Lesser Vehicle. At one point in history, one thousand two hundred fifty-five disciples of the Buddha became Arhats.

True Existence is Emptiness not of this world. The complete, perfect meaning of True Existence is the Supramundane Void; containing neither partial existence nor partial void, it is the Middle Way, also known as the Ultimate Reality. In short, a mind that does not discriminate by means of craving and clinging is the mind that understands the meaning of _not of this world_; though non-existent, it is the True Existence.

The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, in his great wisdom, does not allow his mind to discriminate six senses from experience data. Enlightened by means of perceiving the sound of the tide, he comprehended the nature of hearing as non-abiding; and mind freed of grasping attains the wonderful Dharma of the Inconceivable. Then, this is _the True Existence of the Supramundane Void_.

Next: [Thus, He Overcame All Ills and Defilements](./08-thus-he-overcame-all-ills-and-defilements)

