# Sariputra, Form Does Not Differ From Voidness, and Voidness Does Not Differ From Form. Form is Voidness and Voidness is Vorm; The Same is True for Feeling, Concep-tion, Volition, and Consciousness.

In this part of _The Hrdaya Sutra_, the Buddha expounds the luminous Dharma of the Middle Way; Or, "When Coursing in The Deep Prajna Paramita"; So that the the saints of three wills have the occasion to relinquish their less-than-perfect views. This Sutra was translated by the Tripitaka Master Hsuan Tsang, who depended on the Buddha alone for its meaning; And therefore, we should consider this teaching to be spoken by the Buddha.

The Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara, while practicing the deep Prajna Paramita, attained radiant wisdom through a full understanding of the ultimate Voidness of the five skandhas. The Dharma of the Skandhas is a teaching of existence rather than of emptiness, but due to the depth of his Prajna contemplation, the Bodhisattva acquired the full, complete understanding of True Reality. He ended simultaneously the two kinds of Birth-and-Death and the five fundamental conditions giving rise to passion and delusion, and thus, irreversibly overcame all suffering.

Turning to and addressing Sariputra, the Buddha re-iterated the essential point for the benefit of those not understanding clearly. Sariputra was the best of the best, the most advanced Sravaka, or _hearer_, re-owned for his sagacity. Thus, directly addressing Sariputra, the Buddha declared, "Form does not differ from Void, and Void does not differ from Form. The same is true for feeling, conception, volition, and consciousness."

The senses group produces three types of experience related to the six kinds of data. All of our experiences are generated and accumulated by this group. During their interaction with their objects, the senses are affected, or contaminated, by earhtly views. The result, is then, the attachments which characterizes the sentient sphere, or Kamadhatu. This is one of the major hindrances to Enlightenment.

We may believe that we see with our eyes, but actually, it is our nature of seeing that sees. The nature of seeing has no specific residence. It is vast and boundless, signless, unattainable. Despite the fact that we can see whatever is in front of us, we cannot see our own seeing nature. Because our seeing nature cannot be traced and cannot be fathomed, it is assigned the term Emptiness, or Voidness.

Which comes first? Form? or Nature of Seeing? If we consider that the Nature of Seeing comes first, then, How can it manifest itself in the absence of Form? And if, on the other hand, we consider that the Form comes first, then, How can we become aware of it without our Nature of Seeing? Both of them is relative dharma. The same is true for hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and knowing consciousnesses.

The _Surangama Sutra_ says: "When you see the light, your seeing is not the light; and when you see darkness, your seeing is not the darkness. When your Absolute Seeing perceives the essence of seeing, the former is not the latter. Therefore, how can your affected seeing reach that Absolute seeing?"

Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara practiced the deep Prajna Paramita and perceived that all five skandhas are empty. This radiant, all emcompassing wisdom is the Dharma of Reality as Non-action. In this terms, the mirror's True Nature is the Ultimate Reality. It reveals the five skandhas as essentially void. However, without study and practice, how can we understand the True Reality?

Then, the Buddha continued to expand the scope of this teaching, addressing Arya Sariputra. First, the skandhas were revealed as void of self, and how Voidness is to be revealed as their true essence.

Next: [Sariputra, The Characteristic of The Voidness of All Dharmas Are Non-Arising and Non-Ceasing](./10-sariputra-the-characteristic-of-the-voidness-of-all-dharmas-are-non-arising-and-non-ceasing)


