# Sariputra, The Characteristic of The Voidness of All Dharmas Are Non-Arising and Non-Ceasing

The Buddha, being mindful of some of his adherents who still grasped at worldly dharmas as if they were real, addressed once more the problem generated by the perception of dharmas as increasing, decreasing, defiled, or pure. To explain in more detail, he re-iterated that since all dharmas are void, there is no birth and no death, neither increase nor decrease, neither defilement nor purity.

_The Vaipulya Sutra_ speaks of "neither existing nor extinct, neither permanent nor annihilated, neither identical nor differentiated, neither coming nor going." The history of Buddhism is replete with illustrious sages who pondered and expounded this doctrine at great length. To deluded worldly views, howevery, it makes no sense to speak of no birth and no death. They hold birth and death to be essential; all of us were born and must die in the same way that the grass does.

A simple statement of non-birth and non-death would not be convincing enough, so, to counter any argument, the Buddha added "neither permanent nor annihilated" for those holding on to doctrine of permanence. To make it succinct in terms of the luminous Dharma, it is often said, "If you open your mouth, you are already away from the great; if you give rise to a single thought, it's already worldly dharma." All of this is inconceivable. However, _The Surangama Sutra_ simply asserts, "The verbal language we use - has no real meaning". Thus, the Ultimate Dharma is the silence that follows after the sound of discussion has ceased and when the role of thought is done.

"Neither coming nor going" addresses the view of things as having independent, lasting existence. By _coming_ and _going_ we imply questions such as "Where do people come from, and where do they go?" Similarly, some may wonder, "Where do mountains come from and where do they go?" Again, the view that holds everything in the world to be in some way continuing is called in Sanskrit _parikalpita_. This view is based on a fundamental cognitive distortion, bringing further distortions in its wake. From there on, there is Birth-and-Death, Permanence and Annihilation, Sameness and Differentiation, Coming and Going.

Those who inhabit heavenly realms consider us, the earthlings, dirty; Yet, they are deemed dirty by the Arhat of The Theravadin, while the Arhat is perceived as dirty by a Bodhisattva. Thus, the demarcation between pure and impure is far from clear. If the mind is impure, the world appears correspondingly impure, and vice versa.

Next: [Therefore, in The Void, There is No Form, No Feeling, No Concept](./11-therefore-in-the-void-there-is-no-form-no-feeling-no-concept)


