# Translator's Introduction

Wonderful Prajna! Mother of all Buddhas and the supreme guide and teacher of sages and saints! All that is comes from Prajna and will returns to Prajna.

Sentient beings experience birth and death on the Wheel of Life-and-Death, their minds deeply affected by ignorance, bent by the five skandhas, and confused and submerged in the ocean of suffering for long kalpas. How regrettable!

Prajna is said to be the light in the darkness of a very long night. On the ebb and flow of the ocean of suffering, Prajna is a raft. To a house consumed by a blazing fire, Prajna is the rain to help saving it. Without Prajna, the universe is darkness. Without Prajna, the human mind is ignorant. Without Prajna, sentient beings suffer without respite.

Cultivation of the Prajna Paramita, the perfected virtue of knowing truth by intuitive insight, relieves us from our suffering and helps us to overcome all kinds of calamities. All Buddhas of the past, present, and future, attained Prajna. And the sages and saints have cultivated Prajna. Therefore, all of us need to cultivate the practice of Prajna.

The wonderful doctrine of Prajna is true and, therefore, real; It is perfect in all places and at all times. And yet, it is inconceivable.

If one can understand that voidness is not void since radiant existence exists within its mystery, then, at that moment, all is perceived as void. Sages and saints become accomplished by means of Prajna, the ultimate ground all sentient beings share. The uniformed majority fails to understand that: All that exists is produced by causes and conditios, and that the self is a false self without any selfhood.

Most grasp form and mistake it for True Existence, enduring immeasurable suffering on the Wheel of Life-and-Death. The practice of truth, or the reality of Prajna, excepted, there is no release from suffering in the Three Realms, no hope of freedom from worldly worries. As it is said in __The Mahaprajna Paramita Sutra__, "All forms are unreal and illusory, and if they are seen as such, the Tathagata will be perceived."

And the Sutra says further, "The one who sees me by form and seeks me by sound cannot perceive the Tathagata because of deluded views." This is to be understood as saying that: The one who perceives the form ( or body ) and the sound ( or voice ) as the Buddha is grasping merely the form, missing the true meaning of the reality that he or she is unable to perceive.

Further more, it says, "A Bodhisattva that still clings to the false notion of an ego, a personality, a being and a life, is not a Bodhisattva." Bodhisattvas, like the Buddhas, establish themselves in Emptiness, apprehending their ego, personality, being, and life as false views rooted in duality.

And then, it is said, "The one who hears this pure teaching with a clear and faithful mind can attain the reality that is formless; those freed from all forms are called Buddhas."


